---
title: 'RFC on LTM'
subtitle: 'Time Machine RFC-0005'
author:
- Isabella di Lenardo
- François Ballaud
- Frederic Kaplan

# Don't change the following lines
header-includes:
- \usepackage{fancyhdr}
- \pagestyle{fancy}
- \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document
---

# RFC-0005: RFC on LTM

## Motivation



## Projects

### Example : Museum creating a project

To enter and curate data in the Time Machine Data Graph, a Museum will create a project, possibly jointly with other institutions, with a particular spatio-temporal anchoring objective. For simplicity of the explanation, let’s assume the collection to be ingested is already digitized. The steps are the following:

1- The Museum defines the approximate Zone of Coverage of the collection. This will defines the Local Time Machines for which the data will be relevant. It can be updated later. 

2- The Museum enters the repository where the collection is, typically as a IIIF repository. If the Museum does not have an IIIF solution, a physical or virtual Time Machine Box can be used. https://www.timemachinebox.eu/home. The data will remain in the chosen repository unless the Museum wants to benefit from a long-term preservation service. 

3- Using the Time Machine Tools, the project partners reposition the objects of the chosen collection in space and time (for instance annotating content of paintings or documenting the steps in the trajectory of the objects)

4- As all operations are logged in the Time Machine Operation Graph, a synchronisation tools is capable of informing of any conflict in the metadata inserted linked to other operations of the Time Machine (for instance due to an inference or a non compatible entree). On this basis, the Museum may or may not update its metadata or launch specific research initiatives to investigate further the conflicting data elements. 

This case is a simple one. More complex curation may occur.

## Use Cases

## Services to LTM

### Digitisation Hubs

The Digitisation Hubs are an example of service that will be offered to Local Time Machines  for digitisation (e.g. scanning of documents, streets, 3D scanning). 

The Digitisation Hubs will enable to seamlessly aggregated new document and metadata into a Time Machine Data Graph, with the appropriate standards in terms of resolution, file formats, and metadata during acquisition. Contractual aspects will be dealt with the Time Machine Standard Contracts. 

The Structure and detailed functioning of the Digitisation Hubs are planned to be developed first as an RFC specifying their structure then implemented as a Service operated by several operators. As planned in the RFC Tree and roadmaps, The RFC on Digitisation Hubs is planned on Y2 and their first implementation on Y3 and Y4. It will be established directly with actors that may become Service operators. 

What is anticipated are the following steps :

a) Declaration of the digitisation Services on timemachine.eu

b) Specification of its Zone of Coverage. The Zone of Coverage will determine the Local Time Machines in which the Services will be publicized. 

c) Precise definition of digitisation offers using only Standard Metrics in order to be able to determine the exact price of the operations 

d) Once the service are ready, direct transaction on the Timemachine.eu platform

This way of functioning should enable to create a well-functioning single European market for digitisation services connecting operators and costumers using agreed standards. 

### Long-term preservation

Likewise, some operators may offer services for the long-term preservation of particular datasets (e.g. IIIF repository). This can for instance include DNA storage. 


