files/drafts/RFC-0005/RFC-0005.md, before:

---
title: 'RFC on LTM'
subtitle: 'Time Machine RFC-0005'
author:
- Author 1

# Don't change the following lines
header-includes:
- \usepackage{fancyhdr}
- \pagestyle{fancy}
- \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document
---

# RFC-0005: RFC on LTM

This file is the template to be used for new RFCs. The first thing to do should always be the modification of the title, subtitle and initial author(s) in the `YAML` header block at the beginning of this file. The title and subtitle need to be in single quotes and all authors need to be on a separate line following the pattern `- author_name`.

The first headline directly above this first paragraph should be changed to contain the RFC-id and the same title as the one being used in the header content.

# Markdown

It is allowed to use the whole range of Markdown features as well as everything supported by Pandoc out of the box. A good overview and introduction can be found in the Markdown specification itself[^daring_markdown] and the Pandoc user documentation[^pandoc_markdown].

## Hyperlinks

RFCs are released as PDF documents. While it is possible to set hyperlinks in Markdown that will also work in PDF documents it is advised to add the actual links in footnotes. This way they can be easily read.  Footnotes (similar to the one in the previous paragraph can be created by adding `[^footnote_name]` where the footnote is to be placed and `[^footnote_name]: Content of the footnote` at the end of this file. Only alphanumeric characters and underscores are allowed. Hyperlinks in footnotes should be added in angled brackets: `<http://example.com>`.

## Images

It is possible to include images. They should be added in an `images` folder directly next to the markdown document. In the text they are referenced like this: `![Image caption](./images/image_name_including_file_ending.png)`. The path is relative to the location of the Markdown file.

## Diagrams

In addition to pre-created images, it is also possible to add so-called *Mermaid*[^mermaid] diagrams and flowcharts to the document. This are two examples:

```mermaid
graph LR
    draft[RFC Draft] --> candidate[RFC Candidate] --> draft
    candidate --> release{RFC release}
    release -.updates on existing RFCs.-> draft
```

```mermaid
pie
    title Time spent on RFCs
    "Preparation" : 10
    "Draft" : 60
    "Release Candidate" : 30
```

<!-- Footnote area: Please keep the list of footnotes sorted alphabetically to simplify managing them -->

[^daring_markdown]: <https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/basics>
[^mermaid]: <https://mermaid-js.github.io/mermaid/#/>
[^pandoc_markdown]: <https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#pandocs-markdown>

Commit message:

Inclusion of the Digitisation Hubs in RFC5 and RFC1

files/drafts/RFC-0005/RFC-0005.md, after:

---
title: 'RFC on LTM'
subtitle: 'Time Machine RFC-0005'
author:
- Isabella di Lenardo
- François Ballaud
- Frederic Kaplan

# Don't change the following lines
header-includes:
- \usepackage{fancyhdr}
- \pagestyle{fancy}
- \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document
---

# RFC-0005: RFC on LTM

## Motivation



## Projects



## Services to LTM

### Digitisation Hubs

The Digitisation Hubs are an example of service that will be offered to Local Time Machines  for digitisation (e.g. scanning of documents, streets, 3D scanning). 

The Digitisation Hubs will enable to seamlessly aggregated new document and metadata into a Time Machine Data Graph, with the appropriate standards in terms of resolution, file formats, and metadata during acquisition. Contractual aspects will be dealt with the Time Machine Standard Contracts. 

The Structure and detailed functioning of the Digitisation Hubs are planned to be developed first as an RFC specifying their structure then implemented as a Service operated by several operators. As planned in the RFC Tree and roadmaps, The RFC on Digitisation Hubs is planned on Y2 and their first implementation on Y3 and Y4. It will be established directly with actors that may become Service operators. 

What is anticipated are the following steps :
a) Declaration of the digitisation Services on timemachine.eu
b) Specification of its Zone of Coverage. The Zone of Coverage will determine the Local Time Machines in which the Services will be publicized. 
c) Precise definition of digitisation offers using only Standard Metrics in order to be able to determine the exact price of the operations 
d) Once the service are ready, direct transaction on the Timemachine.eu platform

This way of functioning should enable to create a well-functioning single European market for digitisation services connecting operators and costumers using agreed standards.
