README.md, before:

[![TM Logo](tm_logo.png)](https://www.timemachine.eu)

# Requests for Comments

This repository is the main location for work on and release of finalised Time Machine _Request for Comments_.

## Drafts in preparation

| ID       | Title                              | Draft pull request                                                                               |
| -------- | ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| RFC-0004 | RFC on the RFC Editorial Committee | [New version of RFC-0004](https://github.com/time-machine-project/requests-for-comments/pull/31) |
| RFC-0005 | RFC on LTM                         | [Current draft of RFC5](https://github.com/time-machine-project/requests-for-comments/pull/32)   |

## Current open drafts

| ID       | Contribution deadline | Main file                                        |
| -------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ |
| RFC-0000 | 2020-11-08            | [RFC-0000.md](files/drafts/RFC-0000/RFC-0000.md) |
| RFC-0001 | 2020-11-08            | [RFC-0001.md](files/drafts/RFC-0001/RFC-0001.md) |
| RFC-0002 | 2020-11-08            | [RFC-0002.md](files/drafts/RFC-0002/RFC-0002.md) |
| RFC-0003 | 2020-11-08            | [RFC-0003.md](files/drafts/RFC-0003/RFC-0003.md) |

## Current open candidates

| ID  | Review deadline | Release | Peer Review URL |
| --- | --------------- | ------- | --------------- |

## Published releases

| ID  | File | Release | Release date |
| --- | ---- | ------- | ------------ |

Commit message:

Prepare for the first release (#37)
* Reformat template and remove mermaid

* Update conversion and build to remove env and mermaid

* Update build file

* Add missing drafts

* Modified build script name

* Move drafts and include book-creation script

* Include RFC-0033 first draft

* Update readme

* Include releases to the build process

* remove obsolete github action configuration files

* Add comments to book build scripts

* Simplify RFC-0000

* Correctly format RFC-0001

* Updated RFC Tree

* Remove file links from RFC tree

* Change status from published to release to conform to RFC-0003

* Simplify RFC workflow in RFC-0003

* Unify uses of "markdown"

* Update emphasized formatting in RFC-0003

* Remove Openreview.net from RFC-0004

* Remove obsolete footnotes

* Update release scripts

* Remove obsolete footnote

* fix build script

* Use release version for book conversion

* Commit missing changes

* Change dockerfiles base

* Modify python in dockerfiles

* Fix title extraction for book build script

* Add "Release" to release "date"

* Add timestamp to pdf book

* Fix RFC-0001

* Replace draft RFC-0033 with template text

* Fix RFC book conversion script to not damage tables

* Change subtitle and authors of the RFC book

* Add book preface

* Preface changes

README.md, after:

[![TM Logo](tm_logo.png)](https://www.timemachine.eu)

# Requests for Comments

This repository is the main location for work on and release of finalised Time
Machine _Request for Comments_.

## RFCs in preparation

| ID       | Title                                       | Draft file                                       | Draft pull request |
| -------- | ------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ | ------------------ |
| RFC-0033 | RFC on Map and Cadaster Processing pipeline | [RFC-0033.md](files/drafts/RFC-0000/RFC-0033.md) |                    |

## Published RFCs

| ID       | File                                               |
| -------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| RFC-0000 | [RFC-0000.md](files/releases/RFC-0000/RFC-0000.md) |
| RFC-0001 | [RFC-0001.md](files/releases/RFC-0001/RFC-0001.md) |
| RFC-0002 | [RFC-0002.md](files/releases/RFC-0002/RFC-0002.md) |
| RFC-0003 | [RFC-0003.md](files/releases/RFC-0003/RFC-0003.md) |
| RFC-0004 | [RFC-0004.md](files/releases/RFC-0004/RFC-0004.md) |
| RFC-0005 | [RFC-0005.md](files/releases/RFC-0005/RFC-0005.md) |
