files/drafts/RFC-0001/RFC-0001.md, before:

---
title: 'RFC on RFC Glossary'
subtitle: 'Time Machine RFC-0001'
author:
- Frederic Kaplan

# Don't change the following lines
header-includes:
- \usepackage{fancyhdr}
- \pagestyle{fancy}
- \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document
---

# RFC-0001:  Time Machine Glossary

## Motivation

The Time Machine Glossary is meant to have clear definition of the term used in the RFC and throughout the other Time Machine document. It should be updated regularly based on the introduction of new RFC. 

When writing RFCs, terms that are part of the Lexicon should be written using an clearly identifiable syntax. The current suggestion is do write them with a Capital and in **Bold**

## Glossary

### 4D Simulator 

One of the Time Machine **Engines**. The 4D Simulator manages a continuous spatiotemporal simulation of all possible pasts and futures that are compatible with the data. The 4D Simulator includes a multiscale hierarchical architecture for dividing space and time into discrete volumes with a unique identifier: a simulation engine for producing new datasets based on the information stored. Each possible spatiotemporal multiscale simulation corresponds to a multidimensional representation in the 4D computing infrastructure. When a sufficient spatiotemporal density of data is reached, it can produce a 3D representation of the place at a chosen moment in History. In navigating the representation space, one can also navigate in alternative past and future simulations. Uncertainty and incoherence are managed at each stage of the process and directly associated with the corresponding reconstructions of the past and the future. 

### Big Data of the Past
 
A huge distributed digital information system mapping social, cultural and geographical evolution. A key objective of Time Machine is that such a system brings together dense, interoperable, standardised (linked data, preferably open) and localised (marked up with spatial-temporal information) social, cultural and geographical heritage resources. 

### Digital Content Processor
 
Automatic process extracting information from documents (images, video, sound, etc.). Level 1 Digital Content Processor labels mentions of entities. Level 2 Digital Content Processor labels relations between entities. The Digital Content Processor of Level 3 labels rules. Each process is fully traceable and reversible. The results of the processing constitute the core dataset of the Big Data of the Past and are integrated in the TM Data Graph. 

### Engine

Systems that act on the **Time Machine Data Graph** to enrich it. Examples of Engines include : The **4D Simulator**, The **Large-Scale Inference Engine" and the **Universal Representation Engine**

### Large-Scale Inference Engine
 
One of the Time Machine **Engines**. The Large-Scale Inference Engine is capable of inferring the consequences of chaining any information in the database. This permits to induce new logical consequences of existing data. The Engine is used to shape and to assess the coherence of the 4D simulations based on human- understandable concepts and constraints. Its origin lies in more traditional logic- based AI technology, which has been slightly overlooked since the recent success of the deep learning architecture, but that can, nevertheless, play a key role in an initiative like TM. 

### Local Time Machine
 
Zone of higher “rebuilding the past activities” density, made of **Time Machine Projects** active in this particular area and specific **Local Time Machine Activities**. Most Local Time Machines focus on cities. 

### Local Time Machine Activities

Declared Activites (e.g. events, training session) by participants of **Local Time Machine Projects** 

### Technical Charter
 
The Technical Charter defines the Time Machines Rules, Recommendations, Metrics and Official software. The document is revised periodically. 

### Time Machine Box
 
Servers that allow partners to store their documents and metadata and to integrate the **Time Machine Network** easily and be appropriately documented in the **Time Machine Data Graph**. The Time Machine Box is part of the **Time Machine Official Components**. 

### Time Machine CSA
 
Project with 33 partners supported by European Commission during the year 2019-2020 to produce a 10y roadmap for the Time Machine project. 

### Time Machine Data Graph
 
Formal representation of knowledge extracted by human or automatic process, represented with semantic web technology. 

### Time Machine Index
 
The TM index is a global system indexing different type of objects: e.g. documents; iconography; 3D geometries. It gathers all information regarding documents and their contents and could be used as a basis for other search engine infrastructures. 

### Time Machine Infrastructure Alliance
 
Coalition of TM’s partners regrouping in-kind donators for infrastructure components (server’s space and computing power). 

### Time Machine Mirror World
 
One of the API of the Time Machine using the processing of the 3 TM Simulation Engines to produce a continuous representation model that can be accessed as an information stratum overlaying the real world. 

### Time Machine Network
 
Set of all the partners actually interacting in the Time Machine, as part of **Time Machine Projects**. 

### Time Machine Official Components
 
Pieces of software (e.g. **Time Machine Box**) that help partners conforming to the **Time Machine Tools and AP** to enter the data more efficiently in the **Time Machine Data Graph**. 

### Time Machine Operation Graph
 
Formal representation of the past, on-going and future operations of the partners in the **Time Machine Network** and the data pipelines. 

### Time Machine Organisation
 
Association running the Time Machine. 

### Time Machine Projects

Any projects that produce data for a particular **Local Time Machine”** or several **Local Time Machines**”.  Projects are usually conducted by institutions but can also be launched by individual. Projects may be new or redocumentation of ancient projects. Projects ingest their data into the **Time Machine Data Graph** using the **Time Machine Tools and API**

### Time Machine Request for Comments
 
Main document for the progressive design of the Time Machine infrastructures, standards, recommendations and rules, inspired by the process used for 50 years for the development of Internet Technology, today administrated by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) as part of Internet Society (ISOC). 

### Time Machine Standard Contracts
 
Set of standard contracts to facilitate the interaction between Time Machine partners. 

### Time Machine Standard Metrics
 
Measures helping partners of the **Time Machine Network** coordinate with one another to compare performance.

### Time Machine Tools and API

Data ingestion and curation services offered to **Time Machine Projects** to enter their data in the **Time Machine Data Graph**

### Universal Representation Engine

One of the Time Machine **Engines**. The Universal Representation Engine manages a multidimensional representation space resulting from the integration of the pattern of extremely diverse types of digital cultural artefacts (text, images, videos, 3D), and permitting new types of data generation based on transmodal pattern understanding.

Commit message:

RFC 01 : Inclusion of DIgital Hubs, LTM Webspace, Services to LTM, TM Website, Revision of Engine

files/drafts/RFC-0001/RFC-0001.md, after:

---
title: 'RFC on RFC Glossary'
subtitle: 'Time Machine RFC-0001'
author:
- Frederic Kaplan

# Don't change the following lines
header-includes:
- \usepackage{fancyhdr}
- \pagestyle{fancy}
- \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document
---

# RFC-0001:  Time Machine Glossary

## Motivation

The Time Machine Glossary is meant to have clear definition of the term used in the RFC and throughout the other Time Machine document. It should be updated regularly based on the introduction of new RFC. 

When writing RFCs, terms that are part of the Lexicon should be written using an clearly identifiable syntax. The current suggestion is do write them with a Capital and in **Bold**

## Glossary

### 4D Simulator 

One of the Time Machine **Engines**. The 4D Simulator manages a continuous spatiotemporal simulation of all possible pasts and futures that are compatible with the data. The 4D Simulator includes a multiscale hierarchical architecture for dividing space and time into discrete volumes with a unique identifier: a simulation engine for producing new datasets based on the information stored. Each possible spatiotemporal multiscale simulation corresponds to a multidimensional representation in the 4D computing infrastructure. When a sufficient spatiotemporal density of data is reached, it can produce a 3D representation of the place at a chosen moment in History. In navigating the representation space, one can also navigate in alternative past and future simulations. Uncertainty and incoherence are managed at each stage of the process and directly associated with the corresponding reconstructions of the past and the future. 

### Big Data of the Past
 
A huge distributed digital information system mapping social, cultural and geographical evolution. A key objective of Time Machine is that such a system brings together dense, interoperable, standardised (linked data, preferably open) and localised (marked up with spatial-temporal information) social, cultural and geographical heritage resources. 

### Digital Content Processor
 
Automatic process extracting information from documents (images, video, sound, etc.). Level 1 Digital Content Processor labels mentions of entities. Level 2 Digital Content Processor labels relations between entities. The Digital Content Processor of Level 3 labels rules. Each process is fully traceable and reversible. The results of the processing constitute the core dataset of the Big Data of the Past and are integrated in the **Time Machine Data Graph**. 

### Digitisation Hubs
 
Example of a **Service to Local Time Machines**  for digitisation (e.g. scanning of documents, streets, 3D scanning). Contractual aspects are dealt with the **Standard Contracts**

### Engine

Systems that act on the **Time Machine Data Graph** to enrich it. Examples of Engines include : The **4D Simulator**, The **Large-Scale Inference Engine** and the **Universal Representation Engine**

### Large-Scale Inference Engine
 
One of the Time Machine **Engines**. The Large-Scale Inference Engine is capable of inferring the consequences of chaining any information in the database. This permits to induce new logical consequences of existing data. The Engine is used to shape and to assess the coherence of the 4D simulations based on human- understandable concepts and constraints. Its origin lies in more traditional logic- based AI technology, which has been slightly overlooked since the recent success of the deep learning architecture, but that can, nevertheless, play a key role in an initiative like TM. 

### Local Time Machine
 
Zone of higher “rebuilding the past activities” density, made of **Time Machine Projects** active in this particular area and specific **Local Time Machine Activities**. Most Local Time Machines focus on cities. 

### Local Time Machine Activities

Declared Activites (e.g. events, training session) by participants of **Local Time Machine Projects** 

### Local Time Machine Webspace

Space dedicated to each **Local Time Machine** on the **Time Machine Website**. Include the information about the **Local TIme Machine Activities** and **Services to Local Time Machines**. 

### Services to Local Time Machines

Services offered to **Local Time Machines** appearing as offers on the **Local Time Machines** and using **Standard Contracts**. Services typically appear in the **Local Time Machine WebSpace**. Examples includes **Digitisation Hubs**, **Time Machine Box**

### Standard Contracts
 
Set of standard contracts to facilitate the interaction between Time Machine partners, for instance for the **Digitisation Hubs**

### Technical Charter
 
The Technical Charter defines the Time Machines Rules, Recommendations, Metrics and Official software. The document is revised periodically. 

### Time Machine Box
 
Servers that allow partners to store their documents and metadata and to integrate the **Time Machine Network** easily and be appropriately documented in the **Time Machine Data Graph**. The Time Machine Box is part of the **Time Machine Official Components**. 

### Time Machine CSA
 
Project with 33 partners supported by European Commission during the year 2019-2020 to produce a 10y roadmap for the Time Machine project. 

### Time Machine Data Graph
 
Formal representation of knowledge extracted by human or automatic process, represented with semantic web technology. 

### Time Machine Index
 
The TM index is a global system indexing different type of objects: e.g. documents; iconography; 3D geometries. It gathers all information regarding documents and their contents and could be used as a basis for other search engine infrastructures. 

### Time Machine Infrastructure Alliance
 
Coalition of TM’s partners regrouping in-kind donators for infrastructure components (server’s space and computing power). 

### Time Machine Mirror World
 
One of the API of the Time Machine using the processing of the Time Machie **Engines** to produce a continuous representation model that can be accessed as an information stratum overlaying the real world. 

### Time Machine Network
 
Set of all the partners actually interacting in the Time Machine, as part of **Time Machine Projects**. 

### Time Machine Official Components
 
Pieces of software (e.g. **Time Machine Box**) that help partners conforming to the **Time Machine Tools and AP** to enter the data more efficiently in the **Time Machine Data Graph**. 

### Time Machine Operation Graph
 
Formal representation of the past, on-going and future operations of the partners in the **Time Machine Network** and the data pipelines. 

### Time Machine Organisation
 
Association running the Time Machine. 

### Time Machine Projects

Any projects that produce data for a particular **Local Time Machine”** or several **Local Time Machines**”.  Projects are usually conducted by institutions but can also be launched by individual. Projects may be new or redocumentation of ancient projects. Projects ingest their data into the **Time Machine Data Graph** using the **Time Machine Tools and API**

### Time Machine Request for Comments
 
Main document for the progressive design of the Time Machine infrastructures, standards, recommendations and rules, inspired by the process used for 50 years for the development of Internet Technology, today administrated by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) as part of Internet Society (ISOC). 


### Time Machine Standard Metrics
 
Measures helping partners of the **Time Machine Network** coordinate with one another to compare performance.

### Time Machine Tools and API

Data ingestion and curation services offered to **Time Machine Projects** to enter their data in the **Time Machine Data Graph**

### Time Machine Website

Main website of the project (now "timemachine.eu"). Include the **Local Time Machine WebSpace**

### Universal Representation Engine

One of the Time Machine **Engines**. The Universal Representation Engine manages a multidimensional representation space resulting from the integration of the pattern of extremely diverse types of digital cultural artefacts (text, images, videos, 3D), and permitting new types of data generation based on transmodal pattern understanding.
