---
title: 'RFC on RFC Glossary'
subtitle: 'Time Machine RFC-0001'
author:
- Frédéric Kaplan
- Kevin Baumer
- Daniel Jeller

# Don't change the following lines
header-includes:
- \usepackage{fancyhdr}
- \pagestyle{fancy}
- \fancyhead[R]{}
- \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document
---

# RFC-0001:  RFC on RFC Glossary

## Purpose

The Time Machine Glossary's function is to provide clear definitions of the terms used in the RFCs and throughout related Time Machine documentation. It should be updated regularly as new RFCs are introduced and published. 

## Glossary

### 4D Map

The **4D Map** is a core element of the Time Machine which is used to locate resources, services and reconstructions. The **4D map** is both the map where activities can be followed and the map that aggregates results. It is used for plotting **Local Time Machines** in particular. The density of the 4D Maps is not uniform, in particular some zones may be modelled only in 3D, 2D and even 1D, such as a list of included elements. 

### 4D Simulator 

The **4D Simulator** is one of the Time Machine **Engines**. The **4D Simulator** manages a continuous spatiotemporal simulation of all possible pasts and futures that are compatible with the data. The **4D Simulator** includes a multiscale hierarchical architecture for dividing space and time into discrete volumes with unique identifiers. It is a simulation engine for producing new datasets based on the information stored, and each possible spatiotemporal multiscale simulation corresponds to a multidimensional representation in the 4D computing infrastructure. When a sufficient spatiotemporal density of data is reached, it can produce a 3D representation of the place at a chosen moment in History. In navigating the representation space, one can also navigate in alternative simulations of the past and future. Uncertainty and incoherence are managed at each stage of the process and are directly associated with the corresponding reconstructions of the past and the future. 

### Annotators

**Annotators** are dedicated **Apps** for annotating images and documents 

###  App

An application, either web-based or not, that performs operations on Time Machine **Components**. **Apps** can be developed by the **Time Machine Organisation** or by third parties. **Apps** are pieces of software (in general built as part of official  **Projects** but not necessarily) that enables users to experience and edit the information in the **Data Graph** and the **4D Map**. They can be grouped into families of **Apps** like the **Navigators** or the **Annotators**.


### Big Data of the Past

**Big Data of the Past** are a huge distributed digital information system mapping social, cultural and geographical evolution. A key objective of Time Machine is to ensure that there is a system to bring together dense, interoperable, standardised (linked data, preferably open) and localised (marked up with spatial-temporal information) social, cultural and geographical heritage resources. 

###  Code Library

The **Code Library** is a library accessible in Python (and possibly later other languages) regrouping key **Operators** for processing Data in the Time Machine Environment. 

###  Component 

A **Component** of the Time Machine is itself a Machine in the sense of systems reacting in a predictable manner to input given an internal State. Each component can react or be acted upon through a defined set of inputs / operations. Some of these operations can be internal, others can be external. Internal Operations change the internal structure or state of the Machine and therefore update its history. External Operations changes are characterised by the usage of a **Component**, producing an external output based on the current State of the Machine. Sequences of consecutive states permit the reconstruction of the current state of the component. 

### Conflict Detectors

**Conflict Detectors** are **Apps** that detects incoherence in the **Data Graph** and help users to solve them. 

###  Data Graph

The **Data Graph** is a formal representation of knowledge extracted by human or automatic process, represented with semantic web technology.

###  Data Synchronisation

**Data Synchronisation** automatically compares data documented by a project with conflicting data from another project or an inference. 

### Digital Content Processor

A **Digital Content Processor** is an automatic process extracting information from documents (images, video, sound, etc.). Level 1 Digital Content Processor labels mentions of entities. Level 2 Digital Content Processor labels relations between entities. The Digital Content Processor of Level 3 labels rules. Each process is fully traceable and reversible. The results of the processing constitute the core dataset of the **Big Data of the Past** and are integrated into the **Data Graph**. 

### Digitisation Hubs

**Digitisation Hubs** offer digitisation services based on open-hardware technology. **Digitisation Hubs** are an example of a **Service to Local Time Machines**  for digitisation (e.g. scanning of documents, streets, 3D scanning). Contractual aspects are dealt with via **Standard Contracts**. The Digitisation Hubs will enable Time Machine to seamlessly aggregate new documents and metadata into a **Data Graph** with the appropriate standards in terms of resolution, file formats and metadata assured during acquisition. As a service, it can be associated with a **Zone of Coverage** and will use **Standard Metrics** to determine the exact price of operations. As **Digitisation Hubs** are based on open-hardware technology they can be duplicated anywhere and can thus progressively create a dense network of service providers. 

### Engine

An **Engine** acts on the **Data Graph** to enrich it. Examples of Engines include: the **4D Simulator**, the **Large-Scale Inference Engine** and the **Universal Representation Engine**.

### Frontier Year

Assuming a strict **Retrochronological approach**, the **Frontier Year** is the oldest year in the past for which the **Information Skeleton** of a given place is established. This may, for instance, correspond to the data extracted from the most ancient cadastral map of a city. 

### GeoEntities

**GeoEntities** are existing geographical entities (e.g. a list of Places documented in Open Street Map (OSM)) defined as standard Geographical Information System objects (points - lines - polygons).

### Importers 

**Importers** are **Apps** that enable linking of existing datasets to the **Data Graph**, for example: IIIF Source Importer, Collection creator, Geographical Layer Importer (e.g. Geojsn importer), Datatable importer (e.g. CSV), Cadastral Parcels Importer, Cloud Point Importer, Spherical Image Importer, 3D Model Importer ...

### Information Skeleton

The **Information Sketelon** contains the core information of the **Data Graph**. It should be reconstructed first. 

### Large-Scale Inference Engine

The **Large-Scale Inference Engine** is one of the Time Machine **Engines**. The **Large-Scale Inference Engine** is capable of inferring the consequences of chaining any information in the database. This enables Time Machine to induce new logical consequences of existing data. It is used to shape and to assess the coherence of the 4D simulations based on human-understandable concepts and constraints. 

### Local Datasets

**Local Datasets** are those produced and published about a particular place. Published Datasets are Open Access and can be freely downloaded, even if they are not yet integrated with the global **Data Graph**. They have authors and could be derived from other datasets. The history of their production must be documented, hence they cannot be unpublished, and they appear in in the **Local Time Machine Webspace**

### Local Time Machine 

**Local Time Machines** are zones of high “rebuilding the past activities” density, consisting of active **Projects** active in a particular zone.  A Local Time Machine focuses on a **Municipality** and features the activities and the results of the **Projects** located in this **Municipality**.  Standard values of activities are used to define a scale to represent a Local Time Machine.  **Local Time Machines** are fully defined in **RFC-0005**.

### Local Time Machine Activities

**Local Time Machine Activities** are declared Activities (e.g. events, training sessions) undertaken by participants in the **Projects** of a **Local Time Machine**.

### Local Time Machine Community

The **Local Time Machine Community** is the list of active users of a **Local Time Machine** . These include users active in **Projects** and users active in crowdsourcing activities (e.g. transcription, correction, training, etc.). By default, the active users will be updated with news and announcements concerning **Local Time Machine Activities**.

### Local Time Machine Density of Operations

The **Local Time Machine Density of Operations** characterises the number of activities underway in a given **Local Time Machine**. It characterises both the activities that are part of **Projects** and those related to Citizen Scientist activities.

### Local Time Machine Operations

**Local Time Machine Operations** are a list of basic operations produced by **Projects** and concerning particular **GeoEntitites**. They appear as a log of activities in the **Local Time Machines Webspace**.

### Local Time Machine Visual Plan

The **Local Time Machine Visual Plan** is an automatically generated representation of the spatiotemporal focus of different **Projects** participating in a **Local Time Machine**.  

### Local Time Machine Webspace

A **Local Time Machine Webspace** is dedicated to each **Local Time Machine** on the **Time Machine Website**. It includes information on **Local Time Machine Activities**, **Services to Local Time Machines** and the **Local Datasets**. It also features information on all **Local Time Machine** **Projects** linked to a given **Municipality**.

### Long-term Preservation Service

**Long-term Preservation Services** are offered by some operators for the long-term preservation of particular datasets (e.g. IIIF repository). Some of these services may include innovative technology such as DNA storage. 

### Memory Store

Each document, artefact or building is a **Memory Store**: a type of "hard drive" from the past. Local Time Machines use extraction tools to redocument the content of these memory stores into the **Data Graph**. 

### Metadata Generation

A major objective of Time Machine is the automatic generation of metadata using methods of pattern recognition, machine learning and artificial intelligence. Such automated extraction methods are already being explored for hand-written text recognition and entity extraction. Yet this is only a first step, as today’s systems fail in identifying, for example, text in complex 2-D scenes such as paintings and maps and on 3-D objects such as vases and sculptures. Significant amounts of metadata currently being created by curators in museums and archives could, however, be generated automatically, such as classification of materials and object sizes, as well as linking to other public data sources such as wiki data given appropriate digitisation workflows and sensors. By doing so, Time Machine strives to create a new dimension of accessibility in digital history and cultural heritage. By indexing objects by their content, it will also be possible to link collection items at large scale, thus providing the capability to propagate metadata through these connections. In the current design, this help for metadatation will be provided through **Time Machine Tools and API**. This will enable Time Machine to combine automatic suggestions of metadata with expert curation. 

### Municipalities

**Municipalities** are zones of territories dividing the surface of earth into administratively non-ambiguous zones. The list of **Municipalities** is therefore that of potential Local Time Machines and is fixed and predetermined. Thus, this sets the granularity of the **Local Time Machines**. 


### Navigators 

**Navigators** are the equivalent of Browsers on the World Wide Web. They interpret the **Data Graph** and the **4D Map** to create different processes for exploration. Various typologies of Navigators can be designed: Search Engines, Collection Browsers, 4D Browser (web-based or application-based for better performances), Data Graph Inspector / Editor, Pattern Finder / Navigators, Genealogical Explorers, etc. 

### Operator

**Operators** are functions in the **Code Library**. They can be chained in a procedural way. 

### Operation Graph

The **Operation Graph** is a formal representation of the past, ongoing and future operations of the partners in the **Time Machine Network**. 


### Place

A **Place** is an identified container in which activities can occur. A **Place** corresponds to a particular extent in space, usually determined in reference to another place. A place can be contained in another **Place** and can contain other **Places**. **Places** are symbolic entities in which temporarily extended processes can occur. A **Place** may not be determined by a geographical coordinate. Some moving entities are places (e.g. a car, a plane, a ship). 

### Project

A **Project** produces data for a particular **GeoEntity** or several **GeoEntities**.  Projects are usually conducted by institutions but can also be launched by individuals. Projects may be new or redocumentation of ancient projects. Projects can mine **Sources** and ingest their extracted data into the **Data Graph**. **Projects** are associated with a **Zone of Coverage** that links them with **Local Time Machines**, producing content for  **GeoEntitites**. A **Project** may also produce intermediary datasets that can be downloaded even if they are not yet integrated in the **Data Graph**.  Projects can also develop **Apps** that interact with the **4D Map** and the **Data Graph**. **Projects** can contribute to the **Code Library** by working on the GitHub repository of the Time Machine to produce new **Operators**. These different objectives are non-exclusive from one another. The **Project Development Space** is a space in the **Time Machine Website** that features the **Apps** relevant to the development of **Projects**. 

### Project Repository

The **Project Repository** monitors all active Time Machine projects.

### Retrochronological Approach

The **Retrochronological Approach** consists of starting from the present and going back to the past, retroprogating through **Transfer** the presicion found in the present.

### RFC Editorial Committee

The **RFC Editorial Committee** manages the **Time Machine Request for Comments** process. It is fully defined in **RFC-0003**.

### RFC Tree

The **RFC Tree** organizes the production and planning of **Time Machine Request for Comments** . Its most up-to-date version is in **RFC-0002**.

### Scouting Projects

**Projects** beyond the **Frontier year**

### Segmenters

**Segmenters** are **Operators** that can be used for segmenting objects and persons in images, parcels in Cadastral Maps, performing  Document Layout analysis or 3D object segmentation. 

### Service to Local Time Machines

Are services offered to **Local Time Machines**, appearing as active **Apps** for some **Local Time Machines** and using **Standard Contracts**. Services typically appear in the **Local Time Machine WebSpace**. Examples include **Digitisation Hubs**, **Time Machine Box** and **Long-term preservation Service**

### Spatio-temporal Anchoring

The objective of Time Machine is to localise cultural objects in space and time. For instance, an object in a museum can be associated with several spatio-temporal references: its place of production, the various places it was stored before entering the museum and the spatio-temporal entity it represents. One consequence of this is that a museum in Paris may contribute to many **Local Time Machines** in the world, having, for instance, paintings representing Venice, Madrid or Budapest. Inversely, in many cases, the information for reconstructing the past of a city or a site is scattered in collections all over the world. The granularity of such spatio-temporal repositioning can be more or less precise or more or less uncertain. To be ingested in the **Data Graph**, the museum will create a dedicated project whose goal is to produce the spatio-temporal anchoring of some of its collections in one way or another and to document the process by which this repositioning has been done. In many cases, this work has already been done by the curator or researchers in the museums and the goal is thus only to redocument this work in the Time Machine framework. In other cases, dedicated projects must be conducted. 

### Sources

**Sources** contain information to be extracted (mined). It is typical to distinguish primary sources (e.g. archival records) from secondary sources (e.g. academic articles). 

### Standard Contracts

**Standard Contracts** are sets of standard contracts used to facilitate the interaction between Time Machine partners, for instance in the case of **Digitisation Hubs**


### Standard Metrics

**Standard Metrics** help partners in the **Time Machine Network** to compare performance with one another and to set benchmarks.

### Technical Charter

The **Technical Charter** defines the Time Machines Rules, Recommendations, Metrics and Official software. The document is periodically revised. 

### Time Machine API

The **Time Machine API** are offered to **Projects** to enter their data in the **Data Graph**

### Time Machine Box

**Time Machine Boxes** allow partners to store their documents and metadata, to easily integrate them into the **Time Machine Network** and to ensure they are appropriately documented in the **Data Graph**. The Time Machine Box is one of the **Time Machine Official Components**. 

### Time Machine CSA

The **Time Machine CSA** is a project with 33 partners supported by European Commission, taking place from 2019-2020, to produce a 10-year roadmap for Time Machine. All deliverables and roadmaps, once validated by the European Commission, will be available publically.  

###  Time Machine Community

The **Time Machine Community** encompases all users registered in the **Time Machine Website**. Each user's Time Machine ID can be used to login to third parties **Apps**, and, depending on their level of activity, users may reach different status types linked with particular privileges in terms of operations. These statuses are defined and organised taking inspiration from the Wikipedia systems of privilege (e.g. Administrators, Stewards, etc.).

### Time Machine Index

The **Time Machine Index** is a global system indexing different types of objects: e.g. documents; iconography; 3D geometries. It gathers all information on documents and their contents and could be used as a basis for additional search engine infrastructure. 

### Time Machine Infrastructure Alliance

The **Time Machine Infrastructure Alliance** is the coalition of the Time Machine partners consisting of in-kind donators of infrastructure components (server space and computing power). 

### Time Machine Horizon

The **Time Machine Horizon** is the asymptotic objective of the Time Machine.

### Time Machine Mirror World

The **Time Machine Mirror World** is a digital twin of the real world, enabling 4D navigation. It is based an advanced stage of the **4D Map** associated with dedicated **Apps**. The **Time Machine Mirror World** results from the the processing of the Time Machine **Engines** producing a continuous representation model that can be accessed as an information stratum overlaying the real world. 

### Time Machine Network

The **Time Machine Network** is the set of all the partners actually interacting in the Time Machine as part of **Projects**. 

### Time Machine Official Components

Pieces of software (e.g. **Time Machine Box**) that help partners conform to and interact with the **Time Machine Tools** and **Time Machine API**  to enter the data more efficiently in the **Data Graph**. 

### Time Machine Organisation

The **Time Machine Organisation** is a non-profit Association under the Austrian Law responsible for Time Machine governance and operations. 

### Time Machine Request for Comments

The **Time Machine Request for Comments** are documents for the progressive design of the Time Machine infrastructure, standards, recommendations and rules, inspired by the process which has been used for 50 years for the development of Internet Technology, today administrated by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) as part of Internet Society (ISOC). Their functioning is described in **RFC-0000** and related RFCs. 

### Time Machine Tools

Data ingestion and curation services offered to **Projects** to enter their data in the **Data Graph**

### Time Machine Website

Main website of the Time Machine (currently "timemachine.eu"). Includes the **Local Time Machine WebSpace**

### Transfer

Transfer of a structure of a given year to the year before assuming no change has occurred. Linked with the principle of continuity. If the transfer of a given structure is not impossible, it means that an event occurred. This event must be modelled in order to push the information backward. 

### Universal Representation Engine

The **Universal Representation Engine** is one of the Time Machine **Engines**. It manages a multidimensional representation of latent space resulting from the integration of the pattern of extremely diverse types of digital cultural artefacts (text, images, videos, 3D), and permitting new types of data generation based on transmodal pattern understanding. 

### Zone of Coverage

The **Zone of Coverage** of a **Project** defines its geographical zone of activity. 
