---
# Don't change this header section
title: "RFC on Time Machine Organisation (TMO)"
subtitle: "Time Machine RFC-0069"
author:
  - Juha Henriksson
  - 
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{fancyhdr}
  - \pagestyle{fancy}
  - \fancyhead[R]{}
  - \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document
---

# Motivation

Over the centuries, national, regional and local identities have evolved in relation to one another, through large swathes of transnational mobility and through dense commercial and cultural exchanges that have shaped languages, traditions, arts and many other aspects of human activity. We have a vital need to restore and intensify our engagement with our past as a means of building a common path for existing and future generations, as well as facilitating a dialogue between diverse historical memories, their values and mutual interdependencies. 

Time Machine Organisation (TMO) responds to this need by creating an institutional network running large-scale distributed digitisation and computing infrastructures that will connect history and culture across the world, opening the way for scientific and technological progress to become a powerful ally to safeguarding the diversity of each local identity.

# Time Machine Organisation

“Time Machine Organisation (TMO) – Organisation for international cooperation in technology, science and cultural heritage!” is an internationally oriented non-profit association under Austrian law. Its main office is located in Vienna and oversees a worldwide scope of activities. 

TMO ensures the sustainability and economic independence of the Time Machine project. TMO’s purpose, goals, structures, and functions are defined on the organisation´s constitution [^tmo1]. The association is open to any type of legal entity that deals with science, technology and cultural heritage. Furthermore, it is possible for individuals to join the Time Machine network by becoming a Time Machine Supporter [^tmo2].

# Goals

TMO's main goal is to implement the entity defined in the Time Machine RCF documents, in cooperation with other organizations. These goals include:

- Provide a platform for carrying out projects of different kinds in different funding programmes with different consortia (consulting in terms of funding instruments, finding appropriate partners, project management etc.)
- Develop technologies in order to further advance the digital use and reuse of cultural heritage
- Build an infrastructure that implements the goals and activities of Time Machine (servers, databases, platforms, etc.) as well as strengthen the practical capabilities of the TMO and its members
- Create an environment for continuous exchange of knowledge, best practice and expertise in order to boost current and future developments (online knowledge base, Time Machine events, workshops, national stakeholder meetings, special networking events etc.)
- Provide open source tools and technologies
- Offer support in different fields (use of technologies and infrastructure, project building, etc.)

Time Machine Organisation’s visions, missions and values are defined in more detail in document RFC-0007. Time Machine's infrastructure is based on the RFC on Technical Charter (RFC-0006). The TMO is also responsible for the management of the Time Machine RFC process in accordance with RFC-0004.

# Membership

Time Machine Organisation’s membership is based on the organisation´s constitution [^tmo1] and the respective membership fee regulation [^tmo3]. The association is open to any type of legal entity that deals with science, technology and cultural heritage. The three main member categories are:

- Founding members, who contribute to a solid financial fundament of the Association by paying higher membership fees and fully participate in the Association with special rights and obligations
- Regular members, who fully participate in the Association without any special rights and obligations
- Associated members do not fully take part in the work of the Association, but they take interest in the Association’s benefits and exchange of knowledge and experience or benefit from special services provided by TMO

# General Assembly

TMO’s General Assembly takes place annually. All members have the right to attend the General Assembly. Only founding and regular members have voting rights, but all members have the right to speak. The functions of the General Assembly are defined in the constitution [^tmo1]. These include:

- Acceptance and approval of the reports from the Executive Board about the activities and financial policy of the Association
- Acceptance and approval of the collected annual financial statements from the Executive Board and the controller’s audit report.
- Appointment of the members of the Executive Board and the controlling institutions.
- Decision on membership categories, respective duties, benefits and fees 

# Executive Board

The Association’s administration is incumbent upon the Executive Board that is appointed by the General Assemby. The Executive Board is composed of the president, three vice presidents, the treasurer and his/her deputy, the secretary and his/her deputy, and co-opted members. Only representatives of founding members are entitled to be candidates for membership in the Executive Board, unless the Executive Board decides to appoint a regular member to become a co- opted member. The term of the Executive Board is four years, and members can be elected for a maximum of two consecutive terms.

The duties of the Executive Board, as well as obligations of individual Board members, is defined in the constitution [^tmo1]. The following matters in particular fall into the Executive Board’s responsibility:
- Informing the General Assembly about the Association’s activities and financial situation
- Preparing the Association’s annual account and assets, and providing these, as well all necessary information, to the controller
- Convocation of the General Assembly
- Managing the Association, which includes decisions in all service- and salary-related business
- Actively supporting the intentions and objective targets of the Association

# Linked RFCs

- TMO’s **Visions, missions and values** are defined in **RFC-0007**.
- The **Technical Charter** is defined in the **RFC-0006**.
- The **RFC Editor** and the **RFC Editorial Committee** are defined in
  **RFC-0004**.

<!-- Footnote content. Only alphanumeric characters and underscores are allowed. Please keep alphabetical sorting -->

[^tmo1]: <https://www.timemachine.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/TMO_constitution_EN-GE_final.pdf>
[^tmo2]: <https://www.timemachine.eu/supporter-registration/>
[^tmo3]: <https://www.timemachine.eu/membership-overview/>
