---
# Don't change this header section
title: "RFC on RFC Platform"
subtitle: "Time Machine RFC-0003"
author:
  - Daniel Jeller
  - Frédéric Kaplan
  - Kevin Baumer
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{fancyhdr}
  - \pagestyle{fancy}
  - \fancyhead[R]{}
  - \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document
---

# Motivation

This Request for Comments (RFC) describes the inner workings and technical
details of the RFC platform itself. It aims to provide the technical framework
for authorship, review, community contribution and publication of all future
Time Machine RFCs.

# Introduction

The Time Machine **Requests for Comments** (RFC) workflow is based on
Git[^git_website], a tool initially designed to track changes to source code by
multiple developers and GitHub[^github_about], currently the leading place to
host open-source projects and to create and collaborate on software and many
other kinds of projects. The contribution and review process used by RFCs builds
on the basic _forking_ workflow that "is most often seen in public open source
projects"[^bitbucket_forking]. This ensures that contributions will be tracked
indefinitely, review decisions are documented correctly and it is possible to
permanently access and reference older versions of the RFC drafts.

The choice of this solution is motivated by the possibility to scale the number
of users and contributions over time. It is likely that releasing and updating
RFCs will ultimately be akin to maintaining a large source code base.

In addition to the git-based workflow, TM RFCs will also enable people who are
not familiar with Git and the related tools to participate in additional ways,
for instance by accessing candidate RFCs published as papers on the open peer
review platform OpenReview.net.

# Definitions

Before describing the workflow in detail, this section gives an overview on the
most important design decisions and distinct parts of the platform.

## RFC Editorial Committee and RFC Team

All strategic and aspects of the RFCs are managed by the **RFC Editorial
Committee** appointed by the Time Machine Organisation board, the technical
management, editorial work and support for RFC authors and other contributors is
done by the **RFC Team**.

## Authorship

An RFC author can be an individual person or a group of authors working together
on a single RFC draft. _Note_: This document doesn't differentiate between
individual and groups of authors when talking about _RFC authors_.

## New RFC proposal

RFCs can be proposed by either the RFC Editorial Committee, RFC authors
appointed by the Time Machine Organization or any other interested public
author. An up-to-date list of planned RFCs and their interconnection can be seen
in RFC-0002.

## Identifiers

Any accepted RFC proposal will be assigned an identifier by the RFC Team.
Identifiers are based on the pattern `RFC-[number]`. The numbers contain leading
zeros to pad them to be four digits long. An example is this RFC itself, called
`RFC-0003`, pronounced as _RFC-three_.

## Document format

RFCs are drafted in Markdown[^orig_markdown_syntax] -- more specifically, in the
extended syntax used by Pandoc[^pandoc_markdown], a tool to convert texts
between different file formats.

_Note_: A short introduction into the most important features of Markdown can be
found in the \*RFC-template document[^template]

## RFC content and contribution repository

RFC documents are managed in Git and are hosted in a single repository on
GitHub. The individual RFCs stored in directories and files named after the RFC
number, for example `RFC-0003/RFC-0003.md`. Accompanying files like images are
stored alongside the main RFC documents. Public contributions will be possible
via issues, comments and pull requests, the RFC Team is responsible for the
immediate interaction with the community as well as the maintenance of the
repository.

The drafting process takes place and is therefore documented on the `master`
branch of the main RFC repository[^main_repo_url]. Content contributions to an
RFC currently being drafted can be made by creating a fork[^github_forking] of
the official RFC repository and submitting all modifications in the form of a
GitHub Pull-Request[^github_pullrequest] containing the relevant changes to the
RFC repository.

_Note_: A Pull-Request is only allowed to contain changes to a single RFC (main
document and accompanying files), otherwise it will be rejected by the RFC Team.
Contributions outside an active drafting phase will also be rejected.

## Document lifecycle

The lifecycle phases for an RFC are `draft`, `release candidate` and `release`.
Draft phases will be open to the public for two weeks. Review phases will have a
duration of four weeks. Drafts are stored in the `files/drafts` folder, release
candidates in the `files/candidates` folder and released RFCs in the
`files/releases/` folder of the RFC repository.

## Candidate and release publication

In addition to the Markdown-documents in the RFC repository, candidates and
finalized releases will be converted into PDF files using the above-mentioned
Pandoc. These PDF files will be amended with the time of conversion as well as a
unique release number, then stored in the form of a GitHub
Release[^github_release] with the PDF files attached as release assets.

Release candidates will be published and reviewed on
OpenReview.net[^openreview_about]. Releases will be provided with a DOI and
published on the open-access repository Zenodo[^zenodo].

_Note_: It is to be expected that the automatic file preview for Markdown files
on GitHub (and possibly in other tools as well) will differ from the final PDF
files, as Pandoc enables advanced features like footnotes which are not used by
GitHub and their preferred Markdown dialect.[^gfm]

# Workflow phases

This section describes the progression of the RFC from an initial idea to its
final release as a citable PDF paper.

## Phase 1: Conception

![Conception flow](images/phase_1.png)

Ideas for RFCs can come from both the RFC Editorial Committee and public
authors, both as individual or groups of authors working together. Potential
authors with an idea for an RFC should contact the RFC Editorial Committee to
coordinate the initial conception and drafting process. After accepting an RFC
idea, the RFC Editorial Committee will assign an identifier and the RFC Team
will prepare the draft file from a standardised template in the official RFC
repository in the `files/drafts/[RFC-id]/` folder.

Following this step, the draft author will create a new fork of the official
repository or pull the latest changes into their pre-existing fork, then begin
to work on the initial version of the RFC draft.

After the initial drafting process is finished and the draft is ready to be
shared with the public, the draft author will create a pull request containing
the initial version of the draft from their private fork to the official
repository.

The RFC Team will then conduct a brief internal review of the initial draft to
ensure the formal correctness of the document. After this is concluded and
necessary changes are made by the initial draft author in the scope of the
original pull request, the pull request is merged in the master branch of the
official repository and the public drafting phase will start.

## Phase 2: Public drafting

![Drafting flow](images/phase_2.png)

The drafting of an RFC is designed as a process that enables direct
contributions by public participants as well as the official RFC Editorial
Committee and Team in a similar manner. Over the course of a fixed timespan all
contributors can work on improvements of the draft text and propose and review
changes. The fork-and-pull-request-workflow on GitHub makes sure that each
contribution is registered and stored in the official repository indefinitely.

The official drafting phase begins with the merging of the initial RFC draft by
the RFC Team and extends over a period of two weeks. The main RFC Markdown
document as well as accompanying files, for example images, are stored in the
`files/drafts/[RFC-id]` folder for the duration of the drafting phase.

Persons interested in contributing to the text directly, either by additions or
changes to the existing content, can create a new fork (a full copy) of the
official repository or pull the current state of its master branch into their
own pre-existing fork. They can then either: use the inline editor on the GitHub
website to change the content of the RFC document in their own forked
repository, or clone their repository to their computer and use a Markdown
editor / Git client of their choice to work with the files.

Changes to the RFC draft can be submitted at any time during the drafting phase
in the form of pull requests from the forked repository to the so-called
upstream repository, that is the official RFC repository. This enables the RFC
Editorial Committee, RFC Team and other contributors to review the proposed
changes, suggest editions or point out problems directly next to the provided
version of the draft document.

All pull requests to the official RFC repository during the drafting phase can
be reviewed by any contributor but to be accepted and to be merged, favourable
reviews by at least three appointed reviewers will be necessary. These reviewers
are appointed by the RFC Editorial Committee based on the area of expertise the
RFC falls into. After a pull request passes the review, it is accepted and will
be merged by the RFC Team into the master branch of the RFC repository. This
makes the merged version the most recent official version of the draft. Other
pull requests open at the same time will automatically be compared to this new
version and will have to be amended by the contributors if necessary to solve
possible conflicts with the then-official version.

Merged pull requests will trigger a `GitHub Action`[^github_action] that
compiles the current version of all open draft documents and attaches them as a
ZIP file accessible in workflow job details[^github_job_details]. These preview
files are available for 90 days.

Another way for potential contributors not familiar with Markdown writing and
the Git-based workflow to contribute are so-called GitHub
Issues[^github_issues]. These are commonly used to give users the possibility to
report software bugs to project developers and to track tasks to be done. In the
TM RFCs issues can be created by any person that wants to just report a problem
with the current version of the draft or to discuss specific topics or ideas
related to the RFC. It is the responsibility of the RFC author to react to these
issues and up to the RFC Team to moderate the issues as necessary.

## Phase 3: Release candidate review

![Review flow](images/phase_3.png)

After the end of the drafting phase and after all open pull requests containing
changes to the draft are either merged or rejected, the final version of the
draft will be turned into the first release candidate by the RFC Team. If
necessary, the TM Editorial Committee, in combination with the appointed
reviewers, can abort the RFC drafting process. Otherwise, the RFC Team will
update the list of authors / contributors in the document and move the folder
the RFC and all accompanying documents are located in from `files/drafts` to
`files/candidates`.

To trigger the automatic release of the candidate the RFC Team commits and
pushes the draft-turned-candidate on a new branch[^github_branches] in the main
repository. The branch name will follow the pattern
`[RFC-id]_candidate_[version_number]`. The version number will be assigned by
the RFC Team and will follow semantic versioning[^semver]. This step triggers an
automatic process in GitHub that converts the Markdown document into a PDF RFC
candidate document with integrated version and timestamp and publish it in the
form of a GitHub release.

The PDF file created in this step will be uploaded by the RFC Team as a
submission in the RFC section of the virtual venue "TimeMachine" on the open
peer review platform OpenReview.net[^openreview_timemachine]. The submission
will be open for four weeks during which users of OpenReview will have the
possibility to use the integrated tools to review the candidate or comment on
it. This step ensures a scientifically sound RFC release and enables possible
reviewers to use the tools they are familiar with from other paper review
processes.

Contributors are encouraged to participate on OpenReview during this time, and
discussions in GitHub issues are still possible. However, pull requests on
release candidates will not be accepted.

Depending on the result of the release candidate review process, the RFC will
either progress to the official release phase, return to another drafting and
refinement phase or be cancelled altogether if necessary. If an additional
drafting phase is necessary, the document will be moved back to `files/drafts`
by the RFC Team and pull requests on the `master` branch will again be
considered for merging.

## Phase 4: Official release

![Release flow](images/phase_4.png)

If an RFC candidate is accepted by the community during the review phase on
OpenReview, it will be prepared for the official release by the RFC Team. Again,
the list of contributors will be updated as necessary and the document folder
will be moved to `files/releases`. This change will be pushed onto a new Git
branch that follows the naming pattern `[RFC-id]_release_[version_number]`.
Analogous to the candidate phase, the version number will be assigned by the RFC
Team and will follow semantic versioning. This step will again trigger the
conversion of the document in the form of a versioned and timestamped PDF
document that will be published as an asset on a GitHub release.

The finalized release PDF will then be published as an official publication by
the Time Machine on Zenodo.

## Phase 5: Updates at a later point

Due to the fact that the RFCs describe all aspect of the Time Machine,
additions, amendments or changes to existing RFCs can be necessary. In this case
the RFC Team will move the RFC file from the `files/releases` folder back to the
`files/drafts` folder and a new drafting phase can start based on an amended
draft produced by the new draft authors. It will then again process through all
the different phases as described above resulting in a new release version.

# Q&A

## Question: Do I need a GitHub or an OpenReview.net account to contribute to an RFC?

Yes, you will need a GitHub account if you would like to contribute directly to
the text of an RFC, to discuss issues or to comment on pull requests. If you
would like to comment on a review candidate on OpenReview.net you will need an
account on OpenReview.net. Both tools serve to make attributions of content and
comments from individual persons possible and to help to ensure scientific
standards for the drafting and review process.

## Question: I have an idea for an RFC. What do I do?

Please contact the RFC Editorial Committee with your idea. They will assist you
with the creation an initial draft version of the idea, if it is deemed to be
suitable and feasible.

## Question: I would like to fix some errors in an RFC draft. How do I do that?

The easiest way is for you to sign in to your GitHub account, create a fork of
the main RFC repository into your own account, fix the error in your forked
version of the document, commit it into your repository and open a pull request
outlining your changes to the main RFC repository. It will then be visible, can
be reviewed and then eventually merged into the main draft document if the
changes are accepted by the reviewers.

## Question: I have worked on a draft document myself and would like to preview the final PDF document to see how it would look. How can I do this?

If you follow the official contribution process by forking the main RFC
repository, anything you push to the `master` branch in your own repository will
be automatically converted into a PDF document by triggering a GitHub action.
You can access the ZIP file with the compiled draft documents in the GitHub job
details page in the action section.

## Question: How do I see which drafts are currently available for contributions or release candidates open for review?

You can see the current plan of work in the `README` file of the main RFC
repository.

<!-- TODO -->

<!-- Footnote content. Only alphanumeric characters and underscores are allowed. Please keep alphabetical sorting -->

[^bitbucket_forking]:
    <https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows/forking-workflow>

[^gfm]: GitHub Flavored Markdown (_GFM_) <https://github.github.com/gfm/>
[^git_website]: <https://git-scm.com/>
[^github_about]: <https://github.com/about>
[^github_action]: <https://help.github.com/actions>
[^github_branches]:
    <https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/about-branches>

[^github_forking]: <https://guides.github.com/activities/forking/>
[^github_issues]: <https://guides.github.com/features/issues/>
[^github_job_details]:
    <https://help.github.com/en/actions/configuring-and-managing-workflows/persisting-workflow-data-using-artifacts#downloading-or-deleting-artifacts>

[^github_pullrequest]:
    <https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/about-pull-requests>

[^github_release]:
    <https://help.github.com/en/github/administering-a-repository/about-releases>

[^main_repo_url]:
    <https://github.com/time-machine-project/requests-for-comments>

[^openreview_about]: <https://openreview.net/about>
[^openreview_timemachine]: <https://openreview.net/group?id=TimeMachine.eu/RFC>
[^orig_markdown_syntax]: <https://daringfireball.net/projects/Markdown/syntax>
[^pandoc_markdown]: <https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#pandocs-Markdown>
[^semver]: <https://semver.org/>
[^template]:
    <https://github.com/time-machine-project/requests-for-comments/blob/master/files/template/RFC-template.md>

[^zenodo]: <https://zenodo.org/>
