---
title: 'RFC on the RFC Editorial Committee'
subtitle: 'Time Machine RFC-0004'
author:
- Andreas Maier
- Daniel Jeller

# Don't change the following lines
header-includes:
- \usepackage{fancyhdr}
- \pagestyle{fancy}
- \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document
---

# RFC-0004: RFC on the RFC Editorial Committee

## Motivation

This RFC outlines the basic policies and procedures related to the RFC Editorial Committee, many of which have been inspired by the IEEE Signal Processing Society [^ieee_sps_policy]. The main items that this document defines are: the organisation of the RFC Editorial Committee, how members are appointed, procedure for applications, length of term and main duties.

## Organisation

The RFC Editorial Committee consists of four members. The four members share equal rights and duties with regards to the editing process of the time machine RFCs. For decisions of the RFC Committee to be passed, a majority of more than 60% is required, in practice meaning three of the four members must agree on a decision.

## Appointment

Vacancies in the RFC Editorial Committee are communicated to the general public by the Time Machine Organisation (TMO), and anybody is welcome to apply for a position in the Committee.
After a period of 14 days following the public announcement, the TMO's Board reviews all applications and determines if the new member of the RFC Committee is approved by a majority vote.
In the case of multiple applications that result in affirmative votes totalling less than 50% of the voting members' support,
the top two candidates move on to a second ballot.
The TMO Board may also remove RFC Editorial Committee Members with or without cause by affirmative vote of 66% of the voting members.

## Application Procedures

In order to apply to a vacancy in the RFC Editorial Committee, applicants must submit their application in response to the public call initiated by the TMO Board. An application should consist of a letter of motivation, a curriculum vitae, and a list of publications which will serve to provide the TMO Board with a breadth and depth of information needed to make an appropriate decision.

## Length of Terms

An RFC Editorial Committee Member is appointed for a period of three years. The post may be vacated earlier, should the RFC Editorial Committee Member wish to do so. The appointment may also be terminated by the TMO Board. At the end of their first term, members are permitted to run for a second term. In exceptional cases, the TMO Board may allow additional terms.

## Main Duties

- The duties of the RFC Editorial Committee are to maintain the consistency of the RFC System, to appoint RFC teams to organise new RFCs and to improve upon existing RFCs.
- In particular, the RFC Editorial Committee reviews changes to the GitHub version of the RFCs and comments on their technical soundness.
- Furthermore, the RFC Editorial Committee supports the submission of RFCs for public review on OpenReview.net[^open_review] and appoints two independent, anonymous, expert reviewers for each review process. This is in addition to the public community-driven review and combined will ensure appropriate quality control.
- The RFC Editorial Committee is also responsible for keeping track of RFC versioning, the timely and regular publication of RFCs, and publicly announcing the open review process[^open_review].

<!-- Footnote area: Please keep the list of footnotes sorted alphabetically to simplify managing them -->

[^open_review]: <https://openreview.net/group?id=TimeMachine.eu/RFC>
[^ieee_sps_policy]: <https://signalprocessingsociety.org/volunteers/policy-and-procedures-manual>
