files/drafts/RFC-0002/RFC-0002.md, before:

---
title: 'RFC on RFCs Tree'
subtitle: 'Time Machine RFC-0002'
author:
- François Ballaud
- Frédéric Kaplan
- Isabella di Lenardo

# Don't change the following lines
header-includes:
- \usepackage{fancyhdr}
- \pagestyle{fancy}
- \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document
---

# RFC-0002: RFC on RFCs Tree

## Definition

**RFCs Tree** is the metaphorical description and the hierarchical representation of the **TM Request for Comments** development plan that will be used as a baseline scenario to help monitoring the achievement of **TM Horizon** over the 10 years to come. 

## Behavior 

While **RFCs Tree** is itself resulting from the progressive completion of RFCs through time, **RFCs Tree** also acts as a blueprint defining the incremental steps to the building of the Time Machine Horizon/Infrastructure. 

**RFCs Tree** then behaves as a body of law gathering the whole RFC documentation and production process, and as a progress indicator informing of the upgrade the of the Time Machine components in real time. 

**RFCs Tree** is a macro-architecture plan that shapes dependencies between RFCs. It could be divided into micro thematic or productive arcs as each RFC belongs to specific sequence and is classified in one of the following categories: Framework, Infrastructure, Data, LTM. 

Singular RFCs are the basic units of **RFCs Tree**. The +70 initial RFCs are listed at the end of this document. This initial set is an indicative path to complete the TM Horizon and could be modified/edited if needed.
The tree-like structure -and the subsequent dependencies chains which connect singular RFC- guarantees that TM Horizon would be realised as each RFC edit/removal/addition will cause dynamic adjustements and reorganisations.

RFCs Tree will be consulted in real time on TM website.  


## RFCs list _ may 2020

RFC on RFCs
RFC on TM Glossary
RFC on RFCs Tree
RFC on RFC Editiorial committee
RFC on Publication Platform
RFC on Technical Charter 
RFC on Vision Mission and Values Charter 
RFC on Intellectual property rights and licenses 
RFC on Training
RFC on LTM
RFC on LTM Value Scale 
RFC on LTM Training
RFC on Definition of typologies of digitisation interventions
RFC on standardisation and homologation
RFC on Digitisation Priorities and Data Selection
RFC on Open Hardware 
RFC on data lifecycle 
RFC on Operation Graph
RFC on TM Data Graph 
RFC for TM APIs
RFC for classification and planning of languages to address
RFC on Annotation
RFC on Digital Content Processor Development and Testing
RFC on Digital Content Processor (DCP)  of Level 1
RFC on Digital Content Processor (DCP)  of Level 2
RFC on Digital Content Processor (DCP) of Level 3
RFC on Synergy and interaction in EU Research Infrastructure 
RFC on General Standards for the Super Computing Architecture 
RFC on Time Machine Box 
RFC Digitisation Hubs
RFC for named entity recognition
RFC on Text Recognition and Processing Pipeline
RFC on Structured document pipeline
RFC on map and cadaster Processing pipeline
RFC on Audio Processing Pipeline
RFC on Video Procesing pipeline
RFC on music score pipeline
RFC on Photographic processing pipeline
RFC on Photogrammetric pipeline
RFC on Enhancing Collaboration 
RFC on Franchise System 
RFC on Solidarity 
RFC on Top-Down initiatives 
RFC on Distributed Storage
RFC on Distributed storage system for Public Data 
RFC on Distributed Storage system for Private Data 
RFC on on-demand digitisation
RFC on Global optimization of digitisation process 
RFC for orthographic normalisation
RFC on Content Filtering
RFC on Knowledge transfer 
RFC on Smart Cluster 
RFC on Collaboration indicators 
RFC on Large-Scale Inference Engine 
RFC on the 4D Grid
RFC on 4D Simulations
RFC TM tools for history research
RFC on New Scanning Technology 
RFC on 4D Simulator 
RFC on Universal Representation Engine 
RFC for Machine Translation
RFC on Mirror World Prototyping
RFC on Legal issues linked with Mirror World
RFC on Mirror World Extension Strategy
RFC on Mirror World technical standards
RFC on Virtual/Augmented Reality and Discovery 
RFC on 4D Mirror World
RFC for improved simulation using TM simulation engines
RFC on Large Scale Mirror World



<!-- Footnote area: Please keep the list of footnotes sorted alphabetically to simplify managing them -->

[^daring_markdown]: <https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/basics>
[^mermaid]: <https://mermaid-js.github.io/mermaid/#/>
[^pandoc_markdown]: <https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#pandocs-markdown>

Commit message:

RFC2 : added short motivation for RFC Tree. Short description must also be included for each RFCs

files/drafts/RFC-0002/RFC-0002.md, after:

---
title: 'RFC on RFCs Tree'
subtitle: 'Time Machine RFC-0002'
author:
- François Ballaud
- Frédéric Kaplan
- Isabella di Lenardo

# Don't change the following lines
header-includes:
- \usepackage{fancyhdr}
- \pagestyle{fancy}
- \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document
---

# RFC-0002: RFC on RFCs Tree

## Motivation

The process for writing RFCs needs a long-term planning instruments in order for writers to get a constantly updated version not only of past RFC but also of future planned ones. The **RFCs Tree** as described in this RFC aims at providing an up-to-date description of the planned RFCs with a short textual summary or each of them, including their dependencies with other RFCs. 

## Definition

**RFCs Tree** is the metaphorical description and the hierarchical representation of the **TM Request for Comments** development plan that will be used as a baseline scenario to help monitoring the achievement of **TM Horizon** over the 10 years to come. 

## Behavior 

While **RFCs Tree** is itself resulting from the progressive completion of RFCs through time, **RFCs Tree** also acts as a blueprint defining the incremental steps to the building of the Time Machine Horizon/Infrastructure. 

**RFCs Tree** then behaves as a body of law gathering the whole RFC documentation and production process, and as a progress indicator informing of the upgrade the of the Time Machine components in real time. 

**RFCs Tree** is a macro-architecture plan that shapes dependencies between RFCs. It could be divided into micro thematic or productive arcs as each RFC belongs to specific sequence and is classified in one of the following categories: Framework, Infrastructure, Data, LTM. 

Singular RFCs are the basic units of **RFCs Tree**. The +70 initial RFCs are listed at the end of this document. This initial set is an indicative path to complete the TM Horizon and could be modified/edited if needed.
The tree-like structure -and the subsequent dependencies chains which connect singular RFC- guarantees that TM Horizon would be realised as each RFC edit/removal/addition will cause dynamic adjustements and reorganisations.

RFCs Tree will be consulted in real time on TM website.  


## RFCs list _ may 2020

(SHORT DESCRIPTION WITH EACH RFCs to BE INCLUDED)

RFC on RFCs
RFC on TM Glossary
RFC on RFCs Tree
RFC on RFC Editiorial committee
RFC on Publication Platform
RFC on Technical Charter 
RFC on Vision Mission and Values Charter 
RFC on Intellectual property rights and licenses 
RFC on Training
RFC on LTM
RFC on LTM Value Scale 
RFC on LTM Training
RFC on Definition of typologies of digitisation interventions
RFC on standardisation and homologation
RFC on Digitisation Priorities and Data Selection
RFC on Open Hardware 
RFC on data lifecycle 
RFC on Operation Graph
RFC on TM Data Graph 
RFC for TM APIs
RFC for classification and planning of languages to address
RFC on Annotation
RFC on Digital Content Processor Development and Testing
RFC on Digital Content Processor (DCP)  of Level 1
RFC on Digital Content Processor (DCP)  of Level 2
RFC on Digital Content Processor (DCP) of Level 3
RFC on Synergy and interaction in EU Research Infrastructure 
RFC on General Standards for the Super Computing Architecture 
RFC on Time Machine Box 
RFC Digitisation Hubs
RFC for named entity recognition
RFC on Text Recognition and Processing Pipeline
RFC on Structured document pipeline
RFC on map and cadaster Processing pipeline
RFC on Audio Processing Pipeline
RFC on Video Procesing pipeline
RFC on music score pipeline
RFC on Photographic processing pipeline
RFC on Photogrammetric pipeline
RFC on Enhancing Collaboration 
RFC on Franchise System 
RFC on Solidarity 
RFC on Top-Down initiatives 
RFC on Distributed Storage
RFC on Distributed storage system for Public Data 
RFC on Distributed Storage system for Private Data 
RFC on on-demand digitisation
RFC on Global optimization of digitisation process 
RFC for orthographic normalisation
RFC on Content Filtering
RFC on Knowledge transfer 
RFC on Smart Cluster 
RFC on Collaboration indicators 
RFC on Large-Scale Inference Engine 
RFC on the 4D Grid
RFC on 4D Simulations
RFC TM tools for history research
RFC on New Scanning Technology 
RFC on 4D Simulator 
RFC on Universal Representation Engine 
RFC for Machine Translation
RFC on Mirror World Prototyping
RFC on Legal issues linked with Mirror World
RFC on Mirror World Extension Strategy
RFC on Mirror World technical standards
RFC on Virtual/Augmented Reality and Discovery 
RFC on 4D Mirror World
RFC for improved simulation using TM simulation engines
RFC on Large Scale Mirror World



<!-- Footnote area: Please keep the list of footnotes sorted alphabetically to simplify managing them -->

[^daring_markdown]: <https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/basics>
[^mermaid]: <https://mermaid-js.github.io/mermaid/#/>
[^pandoc_markdown]: <https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#pandocs-markdown>
