---
# Don't change this header section
title: "RFC on the RFC Editor and the RFC Editorial Committee"
subtitle: "Time Machine RFC-0004"
author:
  - Andreas Maier
  - Juha Henriksson
  - Daniel Jeller
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{fancyhdr}
  - \pagestyle{fancy}
  - \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document
---

# Motivation

This RFC defines the duties of the RFC Editor. It also outlines the basic
policies and procedures related to the RFC Editorial Committee, many of which
have been inspired by the IEEE Signal Processing Society [^ieee_sps_policy].

# The RFC Editor

The Time Machine RFC Editor is appointed by the Time Machine Organisation’s Board.

## Main Duties

- The RFC Editor recruits writers for RFC’s and guides the writing process of
  RFC’s
- The RFC Editor maintains the consistency of the RFC System, appoints RFC teams
  to organise new RFCs and to improve upon existing RFCs.
- In particular, the RFC Editor reviews changes to the GitHub version of the
  RFCs and comments on their technical soundness.
- The RFC Editor is responsible for keeping track of RFC versioning, the timely
  and regular publication of RFCs, and publicly announcing new releases.
- The RFC Editor helps to build and manage the RFC Editorial Committee
- The RFC Editor also assists in organizing and running RFC-related workshops
  and other events

# RFC Editorial Committee

## Organisation

The RFC Editorial Committee consists of four members. The four members share
equal rights and duties with regards to the editing process of the time machine
RFCs. For decisions of the RFC Committee to be passed, a majority of more than
60% is required, in practice meaning three of the four members must agree on a
decision.

## Appointment

Vacancies in the RFC Editorial Committee are communicated to the general public
by the Time Machine Organisation (TMO), and anybody is welcome to apply for a
position in the Committee. After a period of 14 days following the public
announcement, the TMO's Board reviews all applications and determines if the new
member of the RFC Committee is approved by a majority vote. In the case of
multiple applications that result in affirmative votes totalling less than 50%
of the voting members' support, the top two candidates move on to a second
ballot. The TMO Board may also remove RFC Editorial Committee Members with or
without cause by affirmative vote of 66% of the voting members.

## Application Procedures

In order to apply to a vacancy in the RFC Editorial Committee, applicants must
submit their application in response to the public call initiated by the TMO
Board. An application should consist of a letter of motivation, a curriculum
vitae, and a list of publications which will serve to provide the TMO Board with
a breadth and depth of information needed to make an appropriate decision.

## Length of Terms

An RFC Editorial Committee Member is appointed for a period of three years. The
post may be vacated earlier, should the RFC Editorial Committee Member wish to
do so. The appointment may also be terminated by the TMO Board. At the end of
their first term, members are permitted to run for a second term. In exceptional
cases, the TMO Board may allow additional terms.

<!-- Footnote area: Please keep the list of footnotes sorted alphabetically to simplify managing them -->

[^ieee_sps_policy]:
    <https://signalprocessingsociety.org/volunteers/policy-and-procedures-manual>
