---
# Don't change this header section
title: "RFC on Time Machine Academies"
subtitle: "Time Machine RFC-0071"
author:
  - Juha Henriksson
  - Ilaria Manzini
  - Isabella di Lenardo
header-includes:
  - \usepackage{fancyhdr}
  - \pagestyle{fancy}
  - \fancyhead[R]{}
  - \fancyfoot[L]{-release-version-}
output: pdf_document
---

# Motivation

Time Machine Academies, provided by the Time Machine Organisation (TMO), are learning events meant to foster the circulation of knowledge and expertise developed within the Time Machine community. Participants are provided with training, both theoretical and practical, on how to apply a particular tool or pipeline to their own project data.

# Description

**Time Machine Academies** [^tmo1] are open to **Time Machine Organisation** (RFC-0069) members and **Local Time Machine** (RFC-0005) Project partners. Some Academies may also be open to professionals from the broader GLAM and Digital Humanities sector.

Time Machine members may suggest topics for these learning events, or express their interest in co-hosting a Time Machine Academy.

Training provided in Time Machine Academies could, for instance:
- provide information on how to build a strategy to digitise archival documents accurately and efficiently.
- show how to apply VR software solutions to enhance the way visitors experience museum collections.
- provide information on state of the art tools and codes for data extraction, analysis, and storage.

Time Machine Academies follow the general rules for Time Machine Training (RFC-0009).

# Academy structure

Each Time Machine Academy consists of two to three separate classes, to allow participants to move from theory to practice by testing the tool or software on a dataset from their own project(s). There is ample space to ask detailed questions and receive tailored support from instructor(s).

# Linked RFCs

- The Time Machine Organisation (TMO) is defined in **RFC-0069**.
- The Local Time Machines are defined in **RFC-0005**.
- The general rules for Time Machine training are defined in **RFC-0009**.

<!-- Footnote content. Only alphanumeric characters and underscores are allowed. Please keep alphabetical sorting -->

[^tmo1]: <https://www.timemachine.eu/time-machine-academies/>
